## Rad Bytes
December 3rd, 2023
## Raspberry Pi TI-83+ emulation handheld

[TODO: add images] 
I remember this video (https://youtu.be/_ONh_7Kzt0E?feature=shared) was one of the first which got me interested in electronics and modding video game consoles. 
In May of 2023, I had an idea for a similar project. 

So I picked up a broken Ti83+ Silver Edition graphing calculator and got to work. The calculator was about $12 shipped to my door. 
I then disassembled it and started to take inventory of what could be done.
I first took notice of the LCD's dimmensions, as it appeared to be a very close match to a different display I had on hand; a 2.8inch ILI9341SPI display.

[image here] 

So it was settled, I will use this size of display connected to a raspberry pi. 
Keeping with the theme of using parts I had on hand, I removed many ports from a Raspberry Pi 3A+. 

[image here, if i have one] 

As the project got pushed aside for other projects, Raspberry Pis came back in stock, so I was able to use a Zero 2w, which has similar specs to the 3A+, just in a smaller board size. 

Due to the stress placed on the display's ribbon cable, it eventually stopped working reliably, then stopped working at all. 
This gave me the opportunity to search for similar sized display modules. I eventually found a display by Waveshare, which is designed for the Raspeberry Pi Pico. 
Most importantly, it operates over SPI using the ST7889VW driver chip. 
As an added bonus, it is an IPS panel, which should provide much better viewing angles that the TFT I orgininally planned to use. 

Then it was a matter of modifying the existing TI-83+ mainboard. As the front side of the board only has button contacts and traces, nothing needed to be done to this side yet. 
The back of the board, however, had many coponents ranging from capacitors and a couple of ICs. 
After desoldering and trimming the components from the mainboard, I was left with a blank canvas. 

[image of board here] 

Then I set my sights on the front of the mainboard. 
The keys of the calculator are connected in a grid matrix style, meaning that rows are connected together and columns are also connected together. 
I didn't want this, so I severed the traces connecting columns together and used the row common connections for ground. 
This enabled me to use the column connection of each button as the button state, which would be shorted to ground once a key is pressed. 
In order to connect each key to the microcontroller, I used 30 AWG magnet wire. It was frustrating to work with at times but ultimately worked out. 

To keep things simple, I used an Arduino Pro Micro as the microcontroller to act as a gamepad. This was originally done with a generic Pro Micro clone. 
However, after having the micro USB connectors break from 2 of them in the same day, I looked for alternatives and found the Sparkfun Pro Micro, which has a USB C version with pads for the USB connection on the bottom of it. 
This board worked great for this project and I highly recommend it over the generic boards. 

The code was written using the Arduino framework and a useful library from Nicohood simply called HID. The library allows for the Arduino to be recognized by the host as a gamepad. 
From there, it's just a matter of assigning buttons and sending the gamepad reports. 
I also made sure to account for debouncing by creating a small "cooldown" interval after a key is pressed and let go, which is kept track of and checked using millis(). 
This makes it possible for button holds and button combinations, as you would expect from a gamepad. 
The repository for the Ardunio code can be found here: [todo: add repo]. 

Then it just came down to collecting everything to the Pi. The screen is connected using SPI and a great driver by Juj, called fbcp-ili9341. 
It enables smoother framerates on simple SPI displays and works perfectly with RetroPie, which is the OS I am running. 

To handle power, I am using a generic lipo charge/boost module. It is similar to a powerboost from Adafruit, but it delivers higher current and sacrifices some features. 
Most notable is the lack of a simple EN pin to control the boost output. This generic module does have an EN key, but it acts "smartly" as it was likely designed with a powerbank in mind. 
This means that every time I wish to power the device, I must open the battery door (I'm glad I didn't glue it shut!) to press the key, before then sliding the top= mounted power switch. 

The project is definitely messy in its current state, but I look forward to eventually making a cleaner revision and adding new features as well. 
